---
layout:     post
title:      Giving back to the community
date:       2015-11-08 12:00:00
summary:    The best way to learn is to teach, but the next best way is to do. Combine the two for (non) profit.
---

## TL; DR

Be the person you need. Summarize and help those who need help. Try to
help with work that you're interested in. Don't be intimidated to help;
someone has to help, and you don't need to be an expert to teach. The
sooner you do something, the faster that you can learn.

----------

At the start of my career, I felt like an imposter. I worked at
companies that used CMS's such as [Umbraco](http://umbraco.com/),
[Sharepoint](https://products.office.com/en-US/sharepoint), and
[Drupal](https://www.drupal.org/) but hardly ever had to do any real
customizations. Whenever I did do complex work, I had a mentor to guide
me. The imposter syndrome only got worst as the client requests got more
and more complicated.

I do not think that I've emphasized this enough.

> Whenever I did any complex work, I had a mentor to guide me.

Someone more experienced than me was willing to answer my questions. I
had to learn how to phrase my questions just right so that he can help
me. I think that the importance of helping out in the community is
overlooked; we live in a world where there is more data than we can hope
to parse. Although technology is getting better at providing contextual
data, I believe that having a person explain a topic is more valuable
than having an algorithm provide hyper informed suggestions.

Once this became apparent, I decided to volunteer more around the
community. This led me to think of a few different ways of helping out.
The following are a few that I came up with:

1. [Participate in open source
   projects](#participating-in-open-source-projects)
2. [Participate in hackathons](#participating-in-hackathons)
3. [Participate in local meetups](#participating-in-local-meetups)
4. [Participate in mentoring
   programs](#participating-in-mentoring-programs)

The last three months, I've been doing these things and a few more.

## Participating in open source projects

It is important to call this out at once: contributing to an open source
project **does not mean that you need to write any code.** There are so
[many out there](https://github.com/explore), many of which might just
need some better documentation, testing or just code reviewing.
Beginners are often intimidated by complex open source projects, but
they do not need to be. Asking to see how one can be a part of the
project is often the best way to start.

In July, I became a team lead on an open source project called [Alliance
Community](https://github.com/NorthBridge/alliance-community). It's been
a lot of fun and was even made Scrum Master (they use the term Coach).
It started because I wanted to help out doing code reviews, and
ultimately ended up restructuring the entire application. It's important
to note that my beginnings at [Alliance
Community](https://github.com/NorthBridge/alliance-community/) seem
rather small; I started small and gained responsibility as time passed
by.

This is important.

> I started small and gained responsibilities as time passed by.

## Participating in hackathons

Aside from trying to find a project online, you can also participate in
hackathons. This is a great way to learn and give back; you get to work
on something small that has potential to grow really big. You're also
able to work with individuals that have very diverse backgrounds.

In October, I participated in a Hackathon called [She Hacks
Chi](https://shehackschi.splashthat.com/). It
was aimed at mostly female developers trying to get young girls into
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). I participated
by becoming a mentor for the hackathon. The team I mentored ended up
winning an award for appealing to the most young girls.

Helping out in Hackathons is a great way to share your knowledge and
learn something new. They are very focused and everyone at the hackathon
is there for similar reasons.

## Participating in local meetups

Giving back can be done through your local meetups. It is important to
note that you should share whatever knowledge you find valuable. When I
was a beginner, it was very difficult for me to find what to share
because I felt that everyone either (a) was too advanced for my
contributions or (b) my contributions were not applicable to anyone.
Regardless of what skill level you're at, **share the knowledge**.

In September, I gave a [lightning talk at Chicago
Ruby](http://www.chicagoruby.org/videos/archives/2015/09/01/chicagoruby-downtown-lightening-talks/)
about programming for the internet of things using Ruby. Ruby is not
usually the first language that people consider for the Internet of
Things but I provided two use cases in which you can use Ruby to perform
these things. In the process of preparing the lightning talk, I ended up
[fixing the Artoo Ruby
gem](https://github.com/hybridgroup/artoo-spark/pull/5) and made my
first unintended open source contribution.

Going to local meetups will benefit you in a sense that whatever you
share, it will be rock solid; you will likely do research and try to
think of your nugget of information as something that can help many
people. This will allow you to get a better understanding of what you're
doing and where you're going. The best part of it is that you will
educate people around you.

Another helpful thing about local meetups is that you get to see what is
currently being done in the industry. You will learn what new
technologies or paradigms are out there, and how they are actively being
developed.

## Participating in mentoring

Another way to contribute to the community is to mentor someone. It can
be a friend, a co-worker or a stranger. Find a local meetup and offer to
start a mentoring program that is a few months long.

As of mid-October, I have been mentoring two exceptional developers in
Web Development using Python. I was able to find them by going to
Chicago's Python user group ([Chipy](chipy.org)). The program is meant
to teach an individual how to do some web development from the ground
up.

There are other groups that are looking for experienced developers to
mentor the youth. The best way to find these types of groups is to go to
a meetup group and find out how you can help. It doesn't hurt to ask.

## Final notes

There are many ways to contribute to the community. Other people will
learn and will teach you new things. You don't need to be an expert to
teach people. Some people are known for thinking that the best way to
learn is to teach.

Go out there and make a difference. Help out the people who were in your
shoes when you were getting started. If you're a beginner, voice your
thoughts and ideas. You'll impress people and get valuable feedback.
